GLOSSARY
This glossary provides players with detailed rules for Twilight
Imperium: Fourth Edition, organized by topic. Players are
encouraged to use the index on page 32 to find specific topics
within the glossary.
1 ABILITIES
Cards and faction sheets each have abilities that players can resolve
to trigger various game effects.
1.1 Each ability describes when and how a player can resolve it.
• If an ability with a specified duration is resolved, the effect
of the ability remains through that duration, even if the
component that caused the ability is removed.
1.2 If a card has multiple abilities, each ability is presented as its
own paragraph.
1.3 If an ability contains the word “Action,” a player must use a
component action during the action phase to resolve that ability.
1.4 If an ability uses the word “cannot,” that effect is absolute.
1.5 When a player resolves an ability, they must resolve the ability
in its entirety. Any parts of the ability preceded by the word
“may” are optional, and the player resolving the ability may
choose not to resolve those parts.
1.6 Abilities on components that remain in play are mandatory
unless those abilities use the word “may.”
1.7 If an ability has multiple effects separated by the word “and,” a
player must resolve as many of the ability’s effects as possible.
However, if the player cannot resolve all of its effects, that
player is allowed to resolve as many as they can.
1.8 COSTS 
1.9 Some abilities have a cost that is followed by an effect. The
cost of an ability is separated from the effect by the word “to”
or by a semicolon. A player cannot resolve the effect of such an
ability if they cannot resolve that ability’s cost.
1.10 Some examples of an ability’s cost include spending resources,
spending trade goods, spending command tokens, exhausting
cards, and activating specific systems.
1.11 TIMING 1.12 If the timing of an ability uses the word “before” or “after,” the
ability’s effect occurs immediately before or after the described
timing event, respectively.
• For example, if an ability is resolved “after a ship is
destroyed,” the ability must be resolved as soon as the ship
is destroyed and not later during that turn or round.
1.13 If the timing of an ability uses the word “when,” the ability’s
effect occurs at the moment of the described timing event.
• Such an ability typically modifies or replaces the timing
event in some way.
1.14 Effects that occur “when” an event happens take priority over
effects that occur “after” an event happens.
1.15 If an ability uses the word “then,” a player must resolve the
effect that occurs before the word “then” or they cannot resolve
the effect that occurs after the word “then.”
1.16 Each ability can be resolved once for each occurrence of that
ability’s timing event. For example, if an ability is resolved
“At the start of combat,” it can be resolved at the start of each
combat.
1.17 If there are multiple abilities that players wish to resolve at the
same time during the action phase, each player takes a turn
resolving an ability in initiative order, beginning with the active
player. This process continues until each player has resolved
each ability that they wish to resolve during that window.
1.18 If there are multiple abilities that players wish to resolve at the
same time during the strategy or agenda phases, players take
turns resolving abilities starting with the speaker and proceeding
clockwise. This process continues until each player has resolved
each ability that they wish to resolve during that window.
1.19 COMPONENT-SPECIFIC RULES
1.20 The opening paragraph of each ability found on an action card
describes when a player can resolve that card’s ability.
1.21 The opening paragraph of most abilities found on promissory
notes describes when a player can resolve that card’s ability.
• Some promissory notes have abilities that trigger as soon as
a player receives the card.
1.22 Abilities on agenda cards correspond to an outcome. Players
resolve these abilities during the agenda phase after players
vote for a particular outcome.
1.23 Each faction has faction abilities presented on its faction sheet.
Each faction’s flagship has one or more unique abilities. Some
abilities provide players with perpetual effects.
1.24 Some units have unit abilities. These abilities are named and
presented above a unit’s attributes on a player’s faction sheet
or on a unit upgrade card. Each unit ability has unique rules for
when a player can resolve that ability. The following abilities
are unit abilities:
• Anti-Fighter Barrage
• Bombardment
• Planetary Shield
• Production
• Space Cannon
• Sustain Damage
1.25 If a unit’s ability uses the phrase “this system” or “this planet,” the
ability is referring to the system or planet that contains that unit.
RELATED TOPICS: Action Cards, Promissory Notes, Strategy Card,
Technology
2 ACTION CARDS
Action cards provide players with various abilities that they can
resolve as described on the cards.
2.1 Each player draws one action card during each status phase.
2.2 Players can draw action cards by resolving the primary and
secondary abilities of the “Politics” strategy card.
2.3 When a player draws an action card, they take the top card
from the action card deck and add it to their hand of action
cards.
2.4 Each player’s hand can have a maximum of seven action
cards. If a player ever has more than seven action cards, that
player must choose seven cards to keep and discard the rest.
• A game effect can increase or decrease the number of cards
a player’s hand can have.
2.5 A player’s action cards remain hidden from other players until
those cards are played.
2.6 The first paragraph of each action card is presented in bold
text and describes the timing of when that card’s ability can
be resolved.
• If an action card contains the word “Action,” a player must
use a component action during the action phase to resolve
the ability. A player cannot resolve a component action if
they cannot completely resolve its ability.
• Multiple action cards with the same name cannot be played
during a single timing window to affect the same units or
game effect. Canceled cards are not treated as being played.
2.7 To play an action card, a player reads and resolves the card’s
ability text, making any decisions as prompted by the card.
Then, that player discards the card, placing it in the action
discard pile.
2.8 If an action card is canceled, that card has no effect and is
discarded.
RELATED TOPICS: Abilities, Component Action, Politics, Status
Phase